Candus Shi, c6shi@ucsd.edu 

Section A09: Learning and Using Causal Knowledge for Advancing AI and Scientific Discovery

Mentored by Professor Biwei Huang and Professor Jelena Bradic

**1. What is the most interesting topic covered in your domain this quarter?**
The most interesting topic covered in my domain this quarter to me is the causal inference stuff in the beginning of the quarter. I have been doing some causal inference work in my research but pretty much most of it is self-study. I have been reading some textbooks and papers, but the way that Professor Jelena framed the whole objective of causal inference as estimating ATE and introducing the estimators that we have with good/less good properties was very helpful to me in thinking about the general picture especially when I get into more niche things like TMLE. This feeling of learning estimators also made me happy because it is very similar to mathematical statistics and this is one of the series (MATH 181) that I enjoyed in my undergraduate course work here at UCSD.

**2. Describe a potential investigation you would like to pursue for your Quarter 2 Project.**
Given the challenges we are facing with the current dataset and how to do good analysis on it, I think this Quarter 1 Project may somehow extedn to our Quarter 2 Project. For example, given the issue of high dimensions where we have a lot of features and not enough samples, we may look into how to address these types of data in terms of causal discovery algorithms. We also had looked at a causal representation learning early in the quarter, but the code was not publicly available. Now it is available on Github, so we can tinker around with this and see if it these methods will work on biological applications. If we follow this path, we will probably look for a different dataset that has less features than microbiome datasets. Finally, I personally am interested in anything more causal inference related, so it would be nice if we could somehow incorporate causal inference at the end. If the dataset has some sort of treatment, outcome, covariates separation in the variables and the identifiability assumptions can reasonably hold, then there can definitely be estimation of ATE. I have worked only on epidemiology data where the challenges in terms of causal inference can be different than those in biomedical applications, e.g. genomics and bioinformatics where one tries to find a causal variant using Bayesian methods.

**3. What is a potential change you'd make to the approach taken in your current Quarter 1 Project?**
A potential change I would make to our approach to the current Quarter 1 Project is to read the original paper very closely more early on so that we could spend more time trying new methods and algorithms that we should be exploring since we are not experts in them. I think we spent too much time in the early stages of data cleaning, then realizing how the data was constructed (but needing to read the appendices of the paper) and redoing a lot of steps. It was a good learning process and a good way for us to get really familiar with the data, but given the time constraints of the Quarter 1 Project, I think it would have been more beneficial if we had completed that part more quickly and spent more time trying to find methods that addressed problems of our data set specifically since the field of causal discovery is so vast.

**4. What other techniques would you be interested in using in your project?**
I'm not sure which project this question is pertaining to. I shall answer for both. For Quarter 1 Project, any technique that the professors mention is definitely worthwile using because we are just trying everything and seeing what we get. I think we should also be thinking about the statistical theory and considerations such as sample size, power, errors, bias, consistency, and so on, even though we are seemingly running graphical search algorithms.

For Qurater 2 Project, again, I would love to have any causal inference methods and techniques. I think the most likely would be some sort of doubly robust methods as those are very attractive, and maybe g-computation. I also think generalizability and transportability is a very interesting concept and most likely quite applicable to biomedical applications. I also am doing some reading on causal ML methods (TMLE) and think that it is a new and interesting field.
